COL7(6)83 Assignment 2
Due date: 5 October, 2025

This assignment deals with frequency-domain filtering, denoising, and deconvolution. All tasks have
to be implemented yourself by working with the array of image pixels, unless otherwise specified in
the problem. You are permitted to perform all tasks using intensity images.
I have provided some standard test images used in image processing. You may use these for your
results.

Part 1
1. When zooming an image to a larger size, one only needs to perform interpolation, but when
shrinking it to a smaller size, one also needs low-pass filtering in order to avoid aliasing. Let us
study this in detail. Assume the original 𝑀 × 𝑁 image 𝑓 was sampled with a spacing of Δ𝑋
samples per unit length in both directions, hence covers a physical size of 𝑋 = 𝑀Δ𝑋 by
𝑌 = 𝑁Δ𝑋 units. Scaling the image size by a factor 𝑘 ∈ 𝑅 corresponds to resampling with a
′

spacing of Δ𝑋 = Δ𝑋 / 𝑘; the case 𝑘 > 1 corresponds to zooming, 0 < 𝑘 < 1 corresponds
to shrinking.
′

a. Suppose we obtain the zoomed/shrunk image 𝑓 simply by interpolating 𝑓 at the new
′

sample locations. What is the Fourier transform of 𝑓 in terms of the Fourier transform of
′

𝑓? Here both 𝑓 and 𝑓 should be treated as sampled signals i.e. sums of impulses.
b. In terms of the given parameters, particularly 𝑘, what is the exact form of the frequency′

domain filter that should be applied before interpolation, so that the resulting 𝑓 is
unaffected by aliasing? What is the corresponding kernel in the spatial domain?
c. Implement both variations of image resizing, i.e. the naive approach (using only
interpolation), and your approach with a filtering step. The filter should be implemented
in the frequency domain. Show the results on an image with significant high-frequency
detail, such as the barbara test image, with different values of 𝑘 = 1 / 2, 1 / 4, 1 / 8
. To clearly see the effects, you may wish to zoom the image back to original size using
nearest neighbour interpolation.
(Note: In practical implementations of image resizing, the filtering step is performed in the spatial
domain with a kernel of small width for performance reasons. You are asked to implement an ideal
version in the frequency domain as a pedagogical exercise.)

2. In an out-of-focus photograph, the point spread function (PSF) is typically a disk, because that
is the shape of the camera’s aperture. However, one can take photographs with uniquely
shaped blurs by modifying the aperture shape! One can simulate this on an existing image by
convolving it with a desired PSF.
a. Choose an image ℎ of size roughly 100-200 pixels in both directions, to use as a point
spread function. Use intensity transformations if necessary to ensure that it consists of a
bright shape on a black background. Using your resizing function from task 1, or a builtin function, create versions in different sizes, with the smallest being about 10 pixels in
size, and normalize the intensities so they add up to 1.
b. Perform blurring using convolution in the spatial domain, along with mirror padding.
You may use a built-in convolution function, or your own implementation. Either way,
take care that the kernel ℎ is treated as properly centered, i.e. its origin should be in the
center and not the top-left corner. Demonstrate the results using the smallest version of
ℎ on (i) an image that contains a few isolated impulses and is zero elsewhere, and (ii) a
rectangular photograph of size on the order of 1000 × 2000.
c. Implement the same blurring via multiplication in the frequency domain. You may use a
built-in FFT implementation. Make sure you get nearly the same result as in part (b), up
to floating-point rounding error. Also show the intermediate images, as in lectures 9 and
10.
d. Measure the compute time 𝑇(𝑟) of the implementations in (b) and (c) for all the
different-sized versions of ℎ. Plot the timings of both methods on the same log-log plot,
with the size of the kernel max (𝑚, 𝑛) on the x-axis.
(Note: For visually attractive results in (b) and (c), try using a photograph containing some very
bright points, e.g. a scene at night, convert it to a datatype with higher precision, and perform a
gamma transformation with 𝛾 ≈ 2.2 before blurring and undo it afterwards.)

Part 2
The following three problems each have an optional task. If you are in a group of 2, you are required
to complete one of the three optional tasks; if you are working individually, no optional task is
required. In either case, doing one more optional task (on top of the 1 or 0 required) will give some
extra marks; doing two more will not increase the marks further.
3. In printing, the appearance of continuous shades of grey is created by printing small dots of
black ink; this process is called halftone. Many scans of such halftone prints are available on
Wikimedia Commons. Take one of these images, making sure to choose one where the haftone
dots are clearly visible. If necessary, you may crop it to a reasonable size for easier processing.

a. Visualize the Fourier spectrum of the image, without padding, and with the DC
component centered. Report the locations of the spikes corresponding to the halftone
dot pattern, and comment on the relationship between these frequencies and the
spacing of the dots in the spatial domain.
b. Using either a Gaussian or a Butterworth (𝑛 = 2) profile, construct a notch filter to
remove these dots. Choose the width of the filter for best results, and show both the
filtered frequency spectrum and the resulting image.
c. Using the same width, change the profile to an ideal filter (i.e. a hard cutoff in the
frequency domain) and show the spectrum and the filtered image again.
d. Optional: Implement optimum notch filtering using the filter in (b) as a starting point. Be
careful to choose a large enough neighbourhood size which spans at least a couple
periods of the dot pattern. Show the estimated noise 𝜂 obtained from the notch filter,
the intermediate values cov(𝑔, 𝜂) and var(𝜂) and the computed weight 𝑤, as well as
the final result. Make sure you perform your computations in a datatype with sufficient
precision!
4. This problem is simply about evaluating some basic techniques’ effectiveness at denoising on
some synthetic test cases. We will use two test images: 𝑐 being a constant image where each
pixel has intensity 𝐼max / 2, and 𝑓 being a natural image of your choice.
a. Create three noisy images from 𝑐, namely: 𝑐1 with additive uniform noise, 𝑐2 with
additive Gaussian noise, and 𝑐3 with salt-and-pepper noise (equal probability of salt and
pepper). In each case, choose the parameters of the noise so that PSNR = 20 dB. Do the
same starting from 𝑓.
b. Denoise each 𝑐𝑖 with an arithmetic mean filter of width 𝑤 = 2𝑎 + 1, and record the
PSNR of the denoised image as a function of 𝑤. Do the same with a median filter, and
make a single plot showing the PSNR of both methods with 𝑤 on the 𝑥 -axis. (You have
get 3 plots total; one for each noise model.)
c. Repeat task (b) with the noisy natural images 𝑓𝑖 . You should observe increase and then
decrease with 𝑤; explain in your report why this is the case. Also show the denoised
images with the best PSNR for both mean and median filtering.
d. Optional: Implement a non-local means filter for higher-quality denoising, and
demonstrate it on 𝑓𝑖 . You may wish to refer to the original paper for details. To improve
performance, only consider contributions from pixels within a 3𝑚 × 3𝑚 “search
window”, where 𝑚 × 𝑚 is the neighbourhood size. Experiment with different values of
both parameters (neighbourhood size 𝑚, standard deviation 𝜎 ) for best results.

5. Take one of your results from problem 2 with a large amount of blur. Add Gaussian noise with
PSNR = 20 dB as in 4(a) to obtain the degraded image 𝑔. We will attempt to perform
deconvolution and recover the original image 𝑓.
a. Visualize the frequency bands of 𝑓 as follows: Let 𝑙0 , 𝑙1 , 𝑙2 , … be various low-pass
filtered versions of 𝑓, with 𝑙𝑖 containing only those frequency components with

𝑢, 𝑣 ∈ [ − 2𝑖 − 1 , 2𝑖 − 1 ] (so 𝑙0 contains only the DC component). Then compute the
band-pass filtered images 𝑏 𝑖 = 𝑓𝑖 − 𝑓𝑖 − 1 for 𝑖 = 1, 2, … . Show l_1,l_2,$ and
𝑏1 , 𝑏2 , … , adding 128 to the 𝑏𝑖 ’s since they have both positive and negative values. Do
the same for 𝑔 and show the low-pass and band-pass filtered images.

b. Apply an inverse filter in the frequency domain to get a (poorly) restored image. Show its
frequency bands as in (a) and comment on how well different frequency bands are
restored.
c. To apply a Wiener filter, you will need to estimate 𝑆 𝜂 (𝑢, 𝑣) and 𝑆 𝑓 (𝑢, 𝑣). Making the
assumption that 𝜂[𝑥, 𝑦] has zero mean and that |𝑁(𝑢, 𝑣)| is constant, use the
Plancherel theorem to find 𝑆 𝜂 (𝑢, 𝑣) in terms of the noise variance 𝜎 . Using the same
logic, find 𝑆 𝑓 (𝑢, 𝑣) in terms of ∥ 𝑓 ∥ assuming that |𝐹(𝑢, 𝑣)| is constant.
d. Perform Wiener filtering assuming that 𝑆 𝜂 / 𝑆 𝑓 is a constant 𝐾 , and plot the PSNR of the
^

^

restored image 𝑓 (i.e. using ∥ 𝑓 − 𝑓 ∥ in the denominator) for a range of values of 𝐾 .
On the plot, mark the value of 𝐾 that corresponds to the estimates of 𝑆 𝜂 and 𝑆 𝑓
obtained in (c). Show the restored image which has the highest PSNR, and also its
frequency bands as in (a) and (b).
e. So far we have used a degraded image 𝑔 with a small amount of noise (PSNR 20 dB).
Repeat (d) with even less noise (PSNR 30 dB) and with more noise (PSNR 10 dB) and
show the results.
f. Optional: Work out how to perform regularized deconvolution when the regularizer is
the

squared
^

^

gradient
^

2

^

norm,
^

2

𝑅(𝑓) = ∑𝑥, 𝑦 ( (𝑓(𝑥 + 1, 𝑦) − 𝑓(𝑥)) + (𝑓(𝑥, 𝑦 + 1) − 𝑓(𝑥, 𝑦)) ) .
^

You

will

^

have to evaluate 𝑅(𝑓) in terms of the Fourier transform 𝐹, and then find a closed-form
^

expression for the optimal 𝐹 similar to the derivation of the Wiener filter discussed in
class. As in the previous tasks, plot the PSNR for a range of values of the regularization
parameter 𝜆, and show the best resulting image.

Submission

You will submit a zip file that contains (i) all your code for the assignment, (ii) a PDF report that
includes your results for each of the assignment problems. In the text of the report, also provide all
relevant information for each part.
All images should ideally be saved in PNG format, which is lossless and so does not cause any
information loss (other than quantization if the intensities are not already in 8-bit format). JPEG is
permitted if your submission PDF is becoming too big for the upload limit.
Your assignment should be submitted on Moodle (old) before midnight on the due date. Only one
person in a group needs to submit. Late days are counted with a quantization of 0.5 days: if you
cannot finish the assignment by midnight, get some sleep and submit by noon the following day.
Separately, each of you must individually submit a short response in a separate form regarding how
much you and your partner contributed to the work in this assignment. Your assignment marks will
not be released until you submit the form.

