10/28/25, 12:05 AM COL7(6)83 Assignment 3

COL7(6)83 Assignment 3
Due date: 28 October

This assignment deals with image transforms, wavelets, and image compression. All tasks have to be
implemented yourself by working with the array of image pixels, unless otherwise specified in the
problem. You are permitted to perform all tasks using intensity images.

Some standard test images used in image processing are provided. You may use these or other
images of your own choice for your results.

As with Assignment 2, if you are in a group of two, you are required to complete one of the three
optional tasks below; if you are working individually, no optional task is required. In either case,
doing one more optional task (beyond the 1 or 0 required) will give some extra marks; doing two
more will not increase the marks further.

1. As discussed in class, Gaussian pyramids are useful for stitching multiple images together.
Obtain two such equal-sized images 𝑓  and 𝑔 that you would like to stitch, e.g.  blending
between an apple and an orange, or swapping faces of two people, or mixing day and night
views of an outdoor scene. (You can also try constructing a panorama from multiple
overlapping images of a very wide/tall scene, but then you will have to perform some
geometric transformations to align the images first.)

a. Construct a Gaussian pyramid of 𝑓 , up to some chosen number of levels. A common
approach is to convolve the image with a filter 𝑤 = 1

16 [1, 4, 6, 4, 1] and then
sample every alternate pixel. Show the resulting stack of images in the Gaussian
pyramid.

b. Then, construct the Laplacian pyramid by subtracting from each level the prediction
obtained from the next upper level. (Usually, prediction is done by inserting zeros,
multiplying by 2, and convolving with 𝑤 again: [𝑓[0], 𝑓[1], 𝑓[2],…] ↦ 𝑤

∗ [2𝑓[0], 0, 2𝑓[1], 0, 2𝑓[2], 0,…].) Show the images in the Laplacian pyramid as
well. Verify that you are able to reconstruct 𝑓  exactly using only the Laplacian pyramid.

c. Manually define a binary mask 𝑚 of the same size as 𝑓  and 𝑔, indicating which regions
of the output should come from which image. Show the image (1 −𝑚)𝑓 +𝑚𝑔,
which stitches the two images with a hard transition.

https://www.cse.iitd.ac.in/~narain/courses/2501-col7683/a3.html 1/6



10/28/25, 12:05 AM COL7(6)83 Assignment 3

d. Create a Gaussian pyramid of 𝑚, and use it to blend the levels of the Laplacian
pyramids of 𝑓  and 𝑔. Use the blended Laplacian pyramid to reconstruct the final image,
which should show a smooth transition.

2. Take an 𝑁 ×𝑁  image whose size is a power of two, 𝑁 = 2𝑘. This will make it easier to
apply the Haar transform.

a. Prove mathematically that if 𝑓  is any 1D array of length 𝑁 = 2𝑘  and 𝑡 is its Haar
transform, then ‖𝑡‖ = ‖𝑓‖. (This fact is sufficient to imply that the Haar transform is
orthogonal.) Then, implement functions to perform the 1D Haar transform and its
inverse, and verify numerically that this result holds on some interesting test signal
(e.g. the middle row of your chosen 𝑁 ×𝑁  image).

b. Implement functions that perform the 2D forward/inverse Haar transforms of an image
by applying your 1D functions on all the rows and columns. Show the input image 𝑓  and
the Haar transform 𝑡. (Since 𝑡 will contain both positive and negative values, it will be
better to show 𝑡+ 𝐼max/2.)

c. The Haar transform, like other wavelet transforms, has the useful property that much of
the image information is concentrated into a small number of coefficients in 𝑡. Explore
this phenomenon as follows: Find the top 𝑁 2/16 coefficients in the Haar transform,
i.e. the ones with the largest absolute value, and zero out the rest. Perform the inverse
Haar transform and visualize the approximated image. For comparison, show the results
of downsampling the image to 𝑁/4 ×𝑁/4 (thus again using 𝑁 2/16 coefficients to
represent the image). Repeat the experiment, retaining only the top 𝑁 2/256 Haar
coefficients vs. downsampling to 𝑁/16 ×𝑁/16.

3. Let’s repeat part of Assignment 2’s problem 4 on denoising, but this time with wavelet
denoising. Choose a photographic image 𝑓  whose width and height are powers of 2, and add
Gaussian noise to obtain a degraded image 𝑔 with PSNR = 20 dB.

a. Compute the Haar wavelet transforms of both 𝑓  and 𝑔, up to some chosen number of
levels (at least 4). Note that this is slightly different from the separable Haar transform
from problem 2, since you only recurse on the upper-left quadrant at each level.
Visualize the resulting coefficient arrays as images, adding 128 to the detail coefficients
(everything except the coarsest-scale approximation coefficients) since they will be both

https://www.cse.iitd.ac.in/~narain/courses/2501-col7683/a3.html 2/6



10/28/25, 12:05 AM COL7(6)83 Assignment 3

positive and negative. Also, plot the histogram of only the detail coefficients for 𝑓 , 𝑔,
and the noise 𝜂 = 𝑔− 𝑓 .

b. Perform hard thresholding with a threshold 𝑡, and record the PSNR of the denoised
image as a function of 𝑡. Do the same with soft thresholding, and make a single plot
showing the PSNR of both methods with 𝑡 on the 𝑥-axis. Show the denoised images
with the best PSNR for both hard and soft thresholding.

c. Optional: Implement the Daubechies db2 wavelet transform, using the scaling and
wavelet function coefficients given in the slides and the textbook. You will need to
choose some padding scheme for both the forward and inverse transforms, and you
may observe some artifacts near the boundaries; this is acceptable as long as the
inverse transform exactly recovers the intensities in the interior of the image. Repeat
tasks (a) and (b) using db2 wavelets, and comment on the quality relative to Haar
wavelets.

4. In this problem, you will perform block DCT coding, like in JPEG. For testing, choose two
different images: (i) an image 𝑓1  containing large regions of the same intensity, such as a
diagram, illustration, or cartoon, and (ii) a photographic image 𝑓2. Crop the images so their
height and width is a multiple of 16.

a. Implement a 16 × 16 block DCT, to transform the image into a collection of coefficient
arrays. Also implement the inverse transformation, and verify you get back the same
image. You may use a built-in DCT implementation.

b. Consider a very simple lossy compression scheme, in which certain coefficients are
discarded and replaced with zeroes. Suppose we would like to discard as many
coefficients as possible while ensuring that the resulting PSNR of the block is no less
than 20 dB, i.e.  RMSE ≤ 0.1𝐼max. Explain how to do so without performing
multiple IDCTs, using the fact that the DCT is orthogonal. Implement your strategy, and
for each of 𝑓1  and 𝑓2, show the resulting decoded image 𝑓𝑖, report the PSNR of the
entire image and the total number of nonzero coefficients, and show the error image |𝑓𝑖
− 𝑓𝑖|.

c. This approach could be applied to the DCT of the entire image, instead of per-block
DCTs, but would it perform better or worse? Repeat (b) using the full DCTs of the images
𝑓1  and 𝑓2, and show the same results. Discuss the pros and cons in your report.

https://www.cse.iitd.ac.in/~narain/courses/2501-col7683/a3.html 3/6



10/28/25, 12:05 AM COL7(6)83 Assignment 3

d. Optional: As discussed in class, recent image compression formats allow more options
of predictive coding on blocks, for example replicating the row immediately above the
block, and replicating the column immediately to the left. The prediction error is then
encoded using lossy DCT. Implement this encoding strategy (choosing the predictor with
the lowest RMSE for each block), as well as the corresponding decoder. Show the same
results as in (b): the decoded image, PSNR, nonzero coefficients, and error image. Also
show the outcome if the prediction error is computed using the rows/columns of the
original image, rather than the decoded blocks.

5. The PNG file format uses a combination of predictive coding, an LZW-like algorithm, and
Huffman coding. Use the same two images 𝑓1  and 𝑓2  from problem 4 for testing. (Note: PNG
actually uses LZ77, an older algorithm by Ziv & Lempel, because LZW was patent-encumbered
until 2004. However, we will use LZW since that’s what we have studied in class.)

a. Assume that the intensity of the top-left pixel is coded as-is, the remaining pixels in the
topmost row and leftmost column are predicted using the pixel to the left and above
respectively, and all other pixels are predicted using the Paeth predictor. Compute and
display the error images 𝑒1  (for 𝑓1) and 𝑒2  (for 𝑓2) showing the prediction error at each
pixel. Also show the error histogram, and report the standard deviation and the entropy
(with the convention that 𝑝 log 𝑝 = 0 if 𝑝 = 0).

b. Implement a decoder which, when given one of the error images from (a), can recover
the original image exactly. Verify it on 𝑒1  and 𝑒2.

c. Implement an LZW encoder and decoder for lists of 8-bit integers. To apply it in
conjunction with predictive coding, you can either initialize the codebook with all
possible errors (−255 to 255), or encode the errors modulo 255 (e.g.  if 𝑓 = 0 and 𝑓
= 1 then 𝑒 = 0 − 1 = 255, and while decoding 𝑓 + 𝑒 = 1 + 255 = 0). First
test your LZW implementation by encoding and decoding a list of 𝑁  zeros — you will
run into the one corner case in the LZW decoding algorithm! Also, for this case of a
constant sequence, find the length of the LZW output as big-O of the input length 𝑁 ,
and prove it mathematically.

d. After the error values are LZW-compressed, we will further compress them using
Huffman coding. Implement a Huffman encoder that takes a set of symbols and their
corresponding probabilities, and builds a code table that associates each symbol with a
list of bits. Also implement a Huffman decoder that takes the code table and a list of bits,
and decodes it into a list of symbols. Build a Huffman code for the codewords output by
LZW, and use it to encode the entire image as a list of bits. Also, for either 𝑓1  or 𝑓2,

https://www.cse.iitd.ac.in/~narain/courses/2501-col7683/a3.html 4/6



10/28/25, 12:05 AM COL7(6)83 Assignment 3

compute the entropy of the codeword distribution (after prediction + LZW), and
compare it with the average Huffman code length.

e. Implement an encoder that puts all the stages together, taking an image 𝑓  of size 𝑀
×𝑁  as input, and producing a tuple containing the Huffman code table 𝑇  and the list
of encoded bits 𝐛. Also implement a decoder that takes 𝑀,𝑁,𝑇 ,𝐛 as input and
reconstructs the original image 𝑓 . For each of 𝑓1  and 𝑓2, report the compression ratio
expected due to prediction (8/𝐻, where 𝐻  is the entropy of 𝑒), the approximate
compression ratio due to LZW (input length 𝑀𝑁  / output length), and the actual
compression ratio of the entire process (8𝑀𝑁  / number of output bits).

f. Optional: The actual PNG format allows the encoder to choose, for each row, which of
the 4 prediction schemes discussed in lecture 20 to use, or to use no prediction at all.
Modify your encoder to try all 5 possibilities when encoding each row, and choose the
best one. It will also have to output, at the start of the row, which prediction scheme is
used, and the decoder will have to take that into account. After implementing this
change, redo part (e) and report the improvement in compression. The PNG format also
allows the use of run length encoding instead of a Lempel-Ziv scheme. Implement this
as another option in the encoder, outputting two symbols for each run (run length and
intensity) which will then go through Huffman coding. As before, report whether this
improves the compression or not.

Submission

You will submit a zip file that contains all your code for the assignment, and a PDF report that
includes your results for each of the assignment problems. In the text of the report, also provide all
relevant information for each part.

All images should ideally be saved in PNG format, which is lossless and so does not cause any
information loss (other than quantization if the intensities are not already in 8-bit format). JPEG is
permitted if your submission PDF is becoming too big for the upload limit.

Your assignment should be submitted on Gradescope before midnight on the due date. There is a
separate submission form for the report and the code. Only one person in a group needs to submit.
Late days are counted with a quantization of 0.5 days: if you cannot finish the assignment by
midnight, get some sleep and submit by noon the following day.

Separately, each of you must individually submit a short response in a separate form regarding how
much you and your partner contributed to the work in this assignment. Your assignment marks will
not be released until you submit the form.

https://www.cse.iitd.ac.in/~narain/courses/2501-col7683/a3.html 5/6



10/28/25, 12:05 AM COL7(6)83 Assignment 3

https://www.cse.iitd.ac.in/~narain/courses/2501-col7683/a3.html 6/6